---
title: "The Honeynet Project Partners With DigitalOcean To Drive  Internet Security Research"
date: "2016-07-27"
---

DigitalOcean, a leading cloud computing platform, announced its support of The Honeynet Project with donation of Web infrastructure and support services. The partnership will allow The Honeynet Project to continue its mission of ongoing research and education surrounding Internet security and risk prevention. “We’re incredibly grateful to DigitalOcean for their support,” said Faiz Shuja, CEO of The Honeynet Project. “As an open source research organization, this donation will prove extremely valuable in supporting our members working to make the Internet a safer place.” The Honeynet Project is a leading international 501c3 non­profit security research organization,dedicated to investigating the latest attacks and developing open source security tools to improve Internet security. Founded in 1999, The Honeynet Project has contributed to fight against malware and malicious hacking attacks and has the leading security professional among members and alumni. Our mission reads "to learn the tools, tactics and motives involved in computer and network attacks, and share the lessons learned". DigitalOcean’s simple approach to cloud infrastructure enables software developers like those involved with The Honeynet Project to build new technologies that analyze and moderate online behaviors. These technologies are in place across the world to protect individuals, companies, and other entities from malware and other malicious attacks. “We want to ensure that The Honeynet Project has continued success in their mission,” says Nick Vigier, Security Director of DigitalOcean. “Our ongoing partnership with top security researchers made this collaboration a natural decision. We are strong believers in the project and we’re happy to do our part to increase awareness of threats on the Internet.” The Honeynet Project intends to use the enhanced resources donated by DigitalOcean to continue building new technologies that benefit the online community.

  

DigitalOcean, Inc. (http://www.digitalocean.com / @digitalocean) is a cloud infrastructure provider focused on simplifying web infrastructure for software developers. The company is headquartered in New York City with data centers throughout the world. For more information, please reach out to press(at)digitalocean(dot)com.
